# Chapter 7:  GROUPING IN PREHISTORY



Groups, aggregates of phenomena, are the focus of scientific study, for it is phenomena that science seeks to explain. However, it has been argued that, as the device for construction of groups, grouping is entirely inappropriate to scientific endeavor, and that the only groups profitably employed are the _denotata_ of classes, especially the _denotata_ of paradigmatic classes. To briefly review the rationale for the exclusion of grouping as a device for scientific unit construction: (1) groups constructed by means of grouping devices can have only extensional definitions consisting of a list of members; and (2) thus such units cannot recur through time and space (a requirement of prediction and control) or be shared (the special requirement of the notion culture). Because groups so constructed consist only of their members, they are applicable only to the members originally included and cannot incorporate new information. Such groups are history bound, inappropriate to, and indeed impossible to use for measuring change in either time or space.
The cursory considerations undertaken in this chapter, then, are germane to our purpose only insofar as grouping has been used or suggested in prehistory to create units. The major aim is to identify grouping so that it can be avoided. The identification of groups which are the products of grouping as opposed to groups which are the _denotata_ of classes would be an easy matter were it not for a penchant of prehistory's literature to present a description of _denotata_ without presenting the classification by means of which the _denotata_ were assembled. This procedural error makes it dif6cult to distinguish grouping and classification in the literature, for most of the readily usable criteria are not presented (e.g., explicit definitions). Adding to this difficulty is the lack of problem in many studies. When units are constructed for their own sake or when the "problem" is "description," the units are not used beyond their names, eliminating any possibility of identifying the nature of the unit from its characteristics of use. This is most unfortunate, for if a unit is employed for some purpose, the use will suffice to distinguish between those units which are the product of grouping and those which are the product of classification. These circumstances are sufficiently common that most units used by prehistorians are amenable to interpretation as either groups or classes. Only when the entire discipline is considered is it possible to assess the nature of the units commonly employed.
Admitting the difficulty of distinguishing grouping from classification in prehistory as a function of the sloppy treatment accorded systematics, all that can be done is point out some of the more frank uses of grouping and the problems which result from these attempts and proposed procedures. From the outset it should be evident that any method, irrespective of its pragmatic utility, can be constructed on paper. The only requirements it must meet are those of logical consistency. Thus it is possible, and, in fact, occurs, that the rationale for some specific study's units may be presented as one or another grouping device, even when the actual procedure has been paradigmatic or taxonomic classification and when the device offered as the rationale could not conceivably have produced the units attributed to it. 
Insofar as I am aware, grouping devices have been used as the rationale or proposed as the means of unit construction only at the scales of discrete object and occupation. Both numerical taxonomy and statistical clustering are in evidence for discrete objects, while only numerical taxonomy has been used for occupations. In all cases the units have been labeled with terms used to designate classes so that "type" in the literature can mean either units which are _denotata_ of paradigmatic classes or the products of grouping. The remainder of this chapter will attempt to show how grouping has been used, what the characteristics of its use are, and the problems which result. 
## Statistical Clustering 
In terms of method, there is nothing which can be added beyond what has already been presented in Part I, since that discussion is based largely upon the use of statistical clustering in prehistory. The primary advocate of statistical clustering in prehistory has been A. C. Spaulding, who first detailed the approach in his 1953 "Statistical Techniques for the Discovery of Artifact Types." The approach begins with a paradigmatic classification. Indeed, Spaulding presents the clearest statement of paradigmatic classification that can be found in the prehistoric literature, being particularly noteworthy in the clear recognition of the dimensional character of the defining modes. The frequency of the definitive modes is tabulated for the collection being considered, and an expected frequency of combinations of the modes in discrete objects assuming a random association of the modes is calculated. Essentially this is a statement or prediction of the number of combinations that will be found strictly as a function of the frequency of the modes. The next step is the tabulation of the actual combinations of modes found in the collection, and the results of this tabulation are compared with the expected frequencies. The outcome of this comparison, which takes into account the size of the sample considered, is the isolation of combinations of modes which cannot be accounted for as the result of random association and vagaries of sample size. There are, of course, two possible kinds of clusters: negative ones, combinations which do not occur or which occur much less frequently than would be predicted on the basis of random association; and positive ones, clusters which occur more frequently than could be predicted on the basis of frequency of the individual modes. The ability to detail what combinations are actually realized out of those combinations that are logically possible is one of the distinct advantages of explicit paradigmatic classification over other kinds of arrangement. It provides immediate feedback in the form of a non-random distribution that the attributes chosen are the products of patterned behavior. Should the distribution be random, it is reasonable to assume that the attributes chosen are not culturally significant in the form in which they have been conceived. The isolation of positive clusters is taken to be a discovery of genuine tendencies on the part of the makers to combine sets of attributes, and the positive clusters labeled types, or rather, potential types. They are potential only, because if two or more significant clusters differ in a few modes (i.e., are closely "similar"), they will be grouped together as a single type of two varieties. 
Up to this point in the procedures, there are no serious difficulties. Two sets of classes are in evidence, the modes used to characterize the material and their combinations into paradigmatic classes (Spaulding's attribute combinations). The comparison of the frequency of the modes with the frequency of their combination indicates that the choices of modes are culturally significant. The difficulty arises when those combinations which are heavily represented are singled out as "types," something quite different from the sense in which type is usually employed, for here the types are directly linked through the counts made of attributes and combinations to a particular body of artifacts. Further, not all the objects in the collection need fall in positive clusters, and those which are infrequently represented are not recognized as types but relegated to the status of "abnormal" combinations of modes. It is likewise entirely possible that no clusters, either positive or negative, might be found, and thus the collection be regarded as having no types or as being all of one type. 
What has been done is clear, as is the nature of the units which result from this approach. The _denotata_ of paradigmatic classes (termed in the approach "attribute combinations") at a given location in time and space have been counted and this tabulation compared with a tabulation of the _denotata_ of the definitive modes (termed in the approach "attributes"). The comparison of these two sets of _denotata_ differing in scale is then used to create units called "types." The "types" are quite obviously groups of real objects. Any kind of counting requires phenomena, and any kind of units based on count in any fashion are phenomenological, that is, groups. This situation could be treated as a particular case of the general confusion of classes with their  _denotata_ in prehistory, the name "type" simply being applied to the objects assigned to the type at a given locality, were It not for the lumping of closely "similar" clusters into the same unit as varieties. 
Further difficulties arise when the infrequently noted combinations are regarded as abnormal combinations of modes. A combination of modes which is infrequently represented at one locality and point in time, and thus an "abnormal combination," will usually be in some other locality and time frequently represented and thus at that locality a "type." Popularity varies through time and space, and units based upon popularity necessarily vary as well. The peculiar consequence of employing statistical clustering is the creation of sets of units unique to each sample location-giving rise to a "rubber yardstick." Being bound to the occurrence of attribute combinations at specific localities, the meaning of the units will change with the frequency of representation. Types so constructed cannot provide means of either comparing localities with one another or measuring formal change. In short, the units are descriptive and are not capable of providing the terms for explanation. Nor, in the absence of problem, are they testable. Figure 19 presents a comparison of the distribution of _denotata_ of paradigmatic classes labeled Type A through Type D with statistical clusters labeled "Type a-Type f." In this simplified hypothetical case, the vertical axis of the diagram represents time, the width of the curves the frequency of occurrence of _denotata_ of paradigmatic classes. The paradigmatic classes do not change through time but rather the frequency of occurrence or the presence and absence of their _denotata_ change. All of the localities represented by the bars in the diagram can thus be compared with each other, the paradigmatic classes providing the basis of comparison. The statistical clusters, it will be immediately noted, are restricted to specific localities, being actual groups of artifacts, and thus these units themselves change through time and provide no basis for comparing the various localities. In Situations requiring larger numbers of types, the contrast between clustering techniques for unit construction and paradigmatic classes would be even more dramatic, though more complicated m Its portrayal. The addition of new localities new data will result in a proliferation of the number of cluster but will not affect the number of paradigmatic types. 

Figure 19. A comparison of statistical clusters (a-f) and the distribution of paradigmatic classes (A-D). Localities (1-5) are represented by horizontal sets of bars; the frequency of occurrence of _denotata_ are represented by horizontal sets of bars; the frequency of occurrence of _denotata_ is represented by the width of the curve. The definition of each paradigmatic class is shown immediately beneath the type designation. 
These difficulties were recognized by Spaulding in, pro.. . f r he clearly states that the types are posing the device, od that further the "types" are restricted "problem" for which the statistical clusters were to provide an order was "description." Thus, in the absence of any testable, definable goal, there was no means to judge the utility of the results. Any kind of units which provide a means of naming will suffice "description." No complicated devices are required, nor do they have any demonstrable advantages, save maybe intellectual satisfaction, over any other means of naming. 
The publication of this device for unit construction led to a long and rather involved argument in the literature with James Ford, who was using types in the sense used herein (paradigmatic classes). The major components of this argument are listed in the bibliography, and make most useful reading, clearly demonstrating the problems presented by using the term "type" for widely different kinds of units. A careful reading of this argument will also demonstrate the utility of making a distinction between groups and classes in attempting to understand the archaeological literature. As in all cases in which argument is more about words (in this case "type") than substance, the argument slowly dies instead of being concluded decisively. It is worth pointing out, however, that the statistical cluster has not seen use in prehistory for any operations beyond those kinds of studies in which creating units for their own sake-description is the goal. Spaulding's clear exposition, some of the finest in the archaeological literature, is often cited as the rationale for "type" even when what is actually done is paradigmatic classification such as Ford argued for, though hardly as succinctly. 
The discussion of clustering leads rather directly to a larger problem, the quest for "folk classifications." Presumably this quest is a motivation behind statistical clustering as a means of unit formation, given that one of its stated aims is the discovery of genuine tendencies on the part of the makers to combine modes. Aside from the fact that there is no way to know whether or not the modes initially used were recognized in some cognitive sense by the makers, the irrelevance, indeed the detriment of such "folk classifications" to scientific investigation, has already been argued. It must be emphasized that employing paradigmatic classes in no way prohibits a statement of these combinational tendencies. These variable representations of combinations are, however, statements about the distribution of _denotata_, not characteristics of the classes. 
For example, in Figure 19 one may by inspection or by the methods outlined as statistical clustering characterize the time and space represented at Locality 5 by the tendency for a single combination of modes (a-X-2-o), Locality 2 by the tendency for two combinations (a-X-1-o and b-X-1--o) which differ in a single mode, and so on, without binding the analytic units to the circumstances that obtain at any one of these localities. One might further speculate that the people involved in Locality 5 recognized but one type; that those at Locality 4, one type of two varieties; and so forth. Insofar as there are no means available to test these statements they must remain speculations. Folk classes constitute interesting data, artifacts, when and if they can be recovered. They are to be explained; they are not an explanation. The aim of making analytic categories coincident with folk categories quite obviously will always result in the units being groups, since the categories themselves are phenomena. This particular goal evidenced in some archaeological studies is an excellent case in point with regard to the inappropriateness of sociocultural anthropology, from which the notion derives, as a model for prehistoric investigation. 
## Numerical Taxonomy 
Numerical taxonomy has been proposed as a device for creating units at the scale of discrete objects; however, this is not yet widely practiced. Numerical taxonomy produces groups, and thus the units have the same characteristics as statistical clusters insofar as their utility in scientific endeavor is concerned. They are contingency-bound, undefined and undefinable, and restricted to the material from which they are derived. They cannot serve as the basis for comparison, nor can they incorporate new data without changing the structure of the units. Such groups bear the same relationship to the distribution of paradigmatic classes as do the statistical clusters in Figure 19. The advocacy of numerical taxonomy as a means of unit construction at the scale of discrete objects has followed the systematic exposition of this device in the biological sciences and incorporates the statistical sophistication characteristic of these disciplines. 
Far more important than the proposed use of numerical taxonomy at the scale of discrete objects is the widespread use, or at least advocacy, of numerical taxonomy to construct units for aggregates of discrete objects, the scale of phenomena herein called occupations. This use of numerical taxonomy long antedates the appearance of this device in the biological sciences and appears during the 1930's in a non-statistical form. In fact, it is almost the only device explicated in the prehistoric literature for unit construction at the scale of occupation, and this in spite of the fact that the units actually employed are, when identifiable, almost invariably paradigmatic classes. 

Figure 20. A schematic diagram showing the coordination of various levels within the Midwestern Taxonomic System. Components are represented by the circles.
The general approach is best stated in its early form by William McKern, one of the inventors of the device, in "The Midwestern Taxonomic Method as an Aid to Archaeological Culture Study," published in 1939. There it is proposed that aggregates of discrete objects, collections which are termed components, be compared with one another in terms of "traits" in order to assess the degree of similarity exhibited between collections. No formal coefficient of similarity or agreement is employed, but, rather, the expression of similarity takes the form of a list of linked (shared) traits and diagnostic (unshared) traits. The linked traits, of course, are the ones used to create the units while the diagnostic ones are to serve the purpose of identification. It is apparent even from the outset that grouping, in this case numerical taxonomy, and classification are undifferentiated in the system, the linked traits clearly belonging to a grouping device, while the diagnostic traits suggest that the groups are to be employed as classes. The lowest-level unit is the component which is considered empirical, that is, part of the phenomenological realm and the referent for the other units in the system. These components are successively grouped on the basis of similarity into foci, aspects, phases, patterns, and bases, with foci being the most similar units, the bases the least similar. It is further observed that styles are linked traits between foci and that as one goes to higher levels the linked traits progressively become fust more technological and then more functional. This generalization, which amounts to saying that styles have smaller distributions than do technologies or functions, admits the possibility of viewing the Midwestern system as a series of classifications, each level being defined by different kinds of criteria. This impression is, however, most superficial. Higher-level units effectively group lower-level units; the components assigned to Focus 1 will not be split among two or three aspects but will belong to the same aspect. The only way in which this coordination of units at different levels may be achieved is the inclusion of all the criteria at the lowest level (focus) and reducing the number to derive the next level, and so forth. Not only are styles linked traits at the level of focus, but so are all the other traits which are linked at higher levels. Thus the difference, for example, between foci and patterns is not in the kind of criteria, but in the number of criteria, which are held in common. This characteristic of coordination of various levels in the Midwestern Taxonomic System is illustrated in Figure 20, in which components are represented by small circles and the various groupings by rectangular boxes. All of the boxes include other boxes and none of them intersect or cross-cut boxes at another level. Figure 21 illustrates the Midwestern system employing a smaller number of components and showing the hierarchic relationships between the various levels of units. The similarity of this figure to the dendrogram in Chapter 4 is apparent, this latter construction being the general structure of numerical taxonomies. The use of the "trait list," especially in subsequent studies employing the Midwestern Taxonomic System, to characterize all of the contents of components and which then serves as the basis for comparing components to state the similarity between them, presages the polythetic character of modern numerical taxonomy. Importantly, in the 1939 statement of the method McKern emphasizes the phenetic character of the units so formulated. They do not imply "relatedness" or distribution m time and space, but simple formal similarity. This is, of course a function of choosing number of traits (similarity) over kind of trcuts as the means of constructing the units. Because there is no control over the kind of criteria used, the resulting units do no have any specifiable meaning. This is important to note, for Figure 21 could be viewed as a taxonomic classification rather than a numerical taxonomy if it were not clear that similarity, not identity, is the basis for construction. Further, as is clear not only from the early formulations of this system but also in its subsequent use, the units consist not of sets of criteria (such is impossible since they can vary from case to case), but of groups of empirical entities, the components. 

Figure 21. A schematic illustration of the hierarchic relationships within the Midwestern Taxonomic System.
It has been advantageous to give the Midwestern Taxonomic System detailed and specific consideration because this method is the basis, at least technologically, of all the modern units constructed at the scale of occupation. In subsequent use the higher levels, from aspect upward to base, have gradually been abandoned-generally because chronology and developmental constructions were required, and, one may speculate, because there is no directly analogous unit in sociocultural anthropology above the focus which is equated in a general way with society or "culture." The only major change has been the replacement of the term "focus" with the term "phase" (see Willey and Phillips in bibliography). The notion of "settlement," introduced in recent years by K. C. Chang, the only unit at this scale which departs from the previous formulations, contains strong elements of the Midwestern scheme. Settlement employed as an empirical unit is almost analogous to component and when employed as a class or when the community concerned is not localized in space analogous to focus or phase. 
Regardless of the particular terms used in the statement of the system and the number of units retained, there is one important and rather obvious inconsistency-the definitions of phase (focus) and component and the relationship between the two basic units. Components, it is insisted, are empirical units. Yet they are not. Component, regardless of the names used, is a manifestation of a phase or focus at a given locality. This is, of course, a possible way to state the relationship between a class and its _denotata_ at a given point in time and space; however, this statement is not a definition by any standards, for if a component is a manifestation of a phase, then one must have phases before one can have components to be able to identify and bound them. On the other hand, phases are said to be groups of components. One must have the components before one can have the phases. This is an interesting circularity, and one which is entirely predictable. As has been pointed out herein in numerous contexts, the "definitions" of groups are always extensional and thus may always be reduced to a statement that "the group is because the group is." The simple fact of the matter is that if one follows the published method, one cannot construct either phases or components; yet, of course, components and phases are constructed. The question thus becomes how. 
At the root of the difficulties presented by component; phase lies the problem of identifying a phenomenological unit larger than discrete object. The solution offered in the literature, calling phases groups of components, is clearly rhetorical and nothing more. The phenomenological units cannot be components, for one cannot identify components without first having phases, and one is still left wondering what phases are units of. Something of a solution is presented in the Midwestern Taxonomic System itself. It was noted that the explication of the system overtly involves numerical taxonomy, but also implicitly, some kind of classification as well. The "traits" used in constructing the units of the system are categorized as linked when shared and as diagnostic when not shared. The diagnostic/linked categorization is exhaustive. A trait is either linked or diagnostic in a given context. There is, however, a third category of traits, a category which is clearly drawn from some • system other than the explicated numerical taxonomy, namely determinants. Determinants constitute a set of traits which recur as a complex from component to component and which is distinctive of a focus. Clearly the determinants of a focus constitute a post hoc class _significatum_, something quite apart from the system as set forth as a kind of grouping and inconsistent with the system as a whole. Further, since there is no ranking or weighting of the determinant traits, it is reasonable to assume that the determinants of a focus constitute the _significatum_ of a paradigmatic class. This is a primary reason that phase was defined as a paradigmatic class of occupations in the previous chapter. 
What apparently is generally done by prehistorians, even though explicated ii1 terms of a numerical taxonomy, is paradigmatic classification. This enables one to account for: (1) how it is possible to create phases when the published rationale is insufficient to create them; (2) why only the focus has been seriously retained from the Midwestern Taxonomic System; ( 3) how it is possible to identify new collections with previously established units; and (4) why determinants, inconsistent with the main theme of the Midwestern Taxonomic System, are nonetheless included in it. This eliminates the circularity of the current treatment of component and phase. Component is used to designate the _denotata_ of a class, the phase or focus, at a given locality. Because the _denotata_ are real and because the actual units being classified lack discreteness, it has been easy to confuse the results of identification with the phenomena for which the classification has been constructed. The relationships between the notions of occupation, phase (focus), and component are illustrated schematically in Figure 22. In this diagram the two columns of boxes represent an ideal stratified site. Those labeled a1y-b2y are occupations, while those labeled I-III represent components. The phases are paradigmatic classes of occupations, the components the _denotata_ of each phase. A locality may consist of several occupations all of which belong to the same phase and thus the locality is a single component site. Alternatively, there may be several occupations which belong to different phases, and thus several components will be recognized at the locality such as in Figure 22.

Figure 22. Pragmatic relationships between occupations, phases and components.
Viewing the Midwestern Taxonomic System as a numerical taxonomy employed as a rationale for paradigmatic classification eliminates most of the inconsistency in the literature about units at the scale of occupation. It does not, however, eliminate the difficulties inherent in the scale itself. While phases can be treated as paradigmatic classes, components as their _denotata_ at a single location, there still is no general definition of what the phenomenological units are. Phases may be paradigmatic classes, but it is not possible to say, at least theoretically, what they are paradigmatic classes of. That such a glaring deficiency should be encountered is not surprising when one considers the dual role the term component has played-on the one hand as the phenomenological unit, and, on the other, the identified _denotata_. Pinpointing the circularity of the component/phase relationship is the crucial firststep in correcting this conceptual deficiency.  
Other kinds of arrangement, particularly keys, areused from time to time in prehistory. Their use has been rather straightforward, and there is little difficulty in recognizing keys. The only difficulty that inheres in their use is that ordinarily the classification for which the key has been made is not presented separately from the key so that the user is restricted to the classes of the key in his identifications. An excellent example of the key as used in prehistory is included in the appended reading list (see Schwartz, 1961). 
## Summary 
Grouping devices both of the kind herein called statistical clustering and numerical taxonomy occur in the prehistoric literature, and, in fact, constitute some of the better theoretical exposition in the discipline. Both clustering and numerical taxonomy can be done with archaeological materials, but, in spite of lip-service to the contrary, neither has been widely employed in problem-solving for rather simple reasons. Their unit products are groups, and groups cannot serve as the basis for either comparison or measurement. They are things to be compared and measured. Further, lacking the feature of recurrence necessary for prediction and explanation, their future utility seems unlikely. In the literature, the major uses to which grouping devices have been put are to provide a rationale for paradigmatic classification (inappropriately) and to pro\-ide names for the units in "description." Given the inexplicit nature of much prehistoric literature, the identification of the device used to create a set of units is often difficult. In the case of grouping devices, their actual use seems restricted to "descriptive" studies. An ability to distinguish grouping from classification in this context is a moot point; any means of categorizing and naming will suffice, since these kinds of studies have no specifiable problem and thus are not testable. In those cases in which grouping is offered as a rationale for an underlying classification, the use to which the units are put will suffice to indicate the superficial nature of the grouping rationale. 
In no fashion is the consideration here any rejection of the techniques of statistical clustering-or, for that matter, numerical taxonomy, but only a rejection of their use as means of formulating units. They are exceedingly useful devices for the description of the characteristics of class _denotata_ and their behavior in dimensions of variability. They cannot, however, provide useful analytic units for any science. Their appropriate role lies in the generation and testing of hypotheses about classes, not in the construction of the classes. The degree to which grouping can produce usable units is a direct function of the implicit classifications used (attributes and attribute combinations) by these devices. Treating the grouping techniques as the means of unit formation only further obscures the definition of the classes that they must employ. 


# Chapter 8: Summary


Today prehistory is rapidly becoming a science, a trend established nearly twenty years ago and one which has gained marked momentum in the last ten. In situations of rapid change there is a strong tendency for an old/new dichotomy to develop and such there is, at least to a moderate degree, in prehistory, represented by what has been called the "old archaeology" and the "new archaeology." The old archaeology, concerned primarily with objects and names for the objects, is giving way. to explanatory methods and objectives of the new archaeology. The freedom permitted the workers of the old archaeology as an art is increasingly being constrained by the goals of the new, primarily by the scientific insistence that statements and constructs be testable. The greatest constraints and the greatest progress in reformulating prehistory as a science has been made in the realm of methods of explanation, much of which has been borrowed from and modified after similar procedures of the hard sciences. 
The terminological confusion and conceptual imprecision of the old archaeology created few difficulties for the field as an art, for it really did not matter what the terms and concepts meant if they were not to be tested. With the insistence that statements and constructs be testable has come the requirement of knowing precisely what the units and statements mean, and the imprecision of the old archaeology has become a major and, in some respects, almost insurmountable liability. From the point of view of the student of prehistory, the old archaeology could be acquired as an art-by intuitive assimilation. Today the discipline must be treated as a body of knowledge which can be learned. Yet the terminological morass presents serious barriers to such acquisition. 
In establishing scientific goals and methods to achieve them, the new archaeology has adopted rather uncritically the units devised by the old archaeology. In many cases, the old units were not specifically designed for any specific purpose, let alone the newly conceived aims of the last two decades. Unfortunately, explanations can be no better than the units they employ and the data they attempt to explain, and the. new archaeology has not seriously considered either of these. Indeed, the most serious criticisms of the new archaeology turn on its lack of formal sophistication. 
In spite of the inadequacy of the old archaeology when measured by the criteria of science and in spite of the lack of any means of internal evaluation aside from a poll of majority opinion as to what is good or which prehistorian is good, explanations of limited scope and capable of independent evaluation have been made. The question is "how?" What makes the "good" prehistorian good? The old archaeology does not provide explicit answers. 
It is in this milieu that we focused upon the construction of units in prehistory, units which have been largely devised by the old archaeology in an unsystematic fashion over a relatively long period of time. These units remain the formal foundation of both new and old archaeologies. Our considerations have been primarily of the old archaeology, which constitutes the bulk of the general literature and the literature on systematics, but with sympathy for the goals of the new. The purpose has been not so much to point out errors and inconsistencies (though this is an important aspect), but to isolate the good features, good, again, from a scientific perspective. Since the many problems faced by the student of prehistory, the confusing terminology, the inconsistencies of method, the lack of evaluative methods, and the lack of any kind of unity of discipline, are all interconnected, a single relatively simple solution was sought in setting forth a unitary system of unit construction including the assumptions on which it is founded and which satisfies the requirements of science. This system was employed to organize and clarify the various units and terms employed by prehistory. Inevitably, much of that currently labeled archaeology was found inadequate as science and discarded from consideration. Much of the literature, however, displays a central theme amenable to interpretation as a scientifically useful system of formal theory. This is nowhere in its entirety spelled out in the archaeological literature. Parts are explicit here, others there, some of it nowhere explicit but implicit only in the operations of the discipline. That a large part of what is done is amenable to such interpretation is a commendation for prehistory. The central theme is essentially an answer to the question of how "good prehistory" and "good prehistorians" have been identified, and why "good prehistory" works. Too, application of the general model permits a unified set of terms, ones which mean the same thing every time they are used, to be employed, and provides a way to identify any unit, given sufficient information, regardless of the name given it in a particular study. A unified terminology was not possible in the old archaeology because of its substantive preoccupation. As long as the names and units were bound to specific studies and specific problems, there was no possibility of developing overt theory. The words for its construction were lacking. In an attempt to avoid this substantive tie and the traditional confusion between concepts and their referents, examples in concrete terms have been kept to a minimum. A unified terminology, measured itself against the goal of science for its utility, can prove of immense benefit in learning prehistory, how it works, its limitations both current and potential, and aid in the selection of units for specific kinds of problems. It is fair, I think, to say that the lack of progress of the old archaeology is not so much a function of the people practicing it or intrinsic failures of the conceptual tools, but of the inconsistent terminology effectively barring much communication and admitting much misunderstanding and error. The rather uncritical borrowing of units by the new archaeology for purposes never conceived when tbe units were created can be avoided. A general model, no matter how simplified it may be, offers the possibility of distinguishing the inadequacies of theory from the misuse, abuse, and misapplication of good theory. Rational evaluation is possible. 
The general model for unit construction in prehistory and the assumptions it is founded upon have been detailed in the several chapters of Part II in piecemeal fashion in an attempt both to show their rationale in the general scheme presented in Part I and to tie them generally to practice in prehistory. The focus upon the original formulations of classificatory concepts in the discipline rather than more modem renamed and elaborated versions points up the basic lack of change in prehistoric systematics. The remainder of this final chapter attempts to present in brief form this general model, the formal theory of prehistory. 
Part I presents the basic notions used throughout, the core of which is the distinction between ideational and phenomenological realms and the correlative distinctions between definition and "description, classes and groups, and classification and grouping. The import of the distinctions is two-fold: ( 1 ) the means of evaluating ideational constructs and phenomena differ-logical proof in the former case and probability or plausibility in the latter; and (2) the characteristics of ideational constructs and phenomenological units differ in respects that affect their utility in scientific endeavor. Ideational constructs are ahistorical and capable of intensional definition, whereas phenomenological units are contingency-bound and capable of extensional definition at best. The ideational and phenomenological realms are articulated in the framework of science, in that science employs ideational constructs to explain phenomena. The distinction between ideational and phenomenological is entirely analytic, in the nature of the logic of justification. If only because men necessarily use language, the two are fused in reality. The utility of such distinctions lies in their ability to clarify what has been done, for both evaluation and communication, but it is not a program of operational procedures. 
Explanation is taken to mean prediction and control. Differences in value are capable of explanation but differences in kind (a function of unit construction) are not. The role of formal theory in science is to provide the means of organizing phenomena so that their explanation is possible. The prime requisite for such organizations is that the units permit recurrence and it is recurrence that enables one to link the known (observed fact) with the unknown (prediction). 
Means for unit construction were examined in terms of the ideational/ phenomenological distinction which results in the identification of two fundamentally different devices for creating arrangements-classification, which produces ahistorical, intensionally-defined, ideational units, termed classes; and grouping, which produces contingency-bound, extensionally-defined sets of phenomena called groups. Classes are articulated with phenomena by means of identification, isolating at given points in time and space those phenomena which display the necessary and sufficient conditions for membership as stipulated by the intensional definition. Identified phenomena constitute special groups called the _denotata_ of the class. The only groups, aggregates of phenomena, which are capable of explanation in a scientific sense are the _denotata_ of classes. Identification is absent with grouping devices since the units and the phenomena are coterminous. 
An additional dimension, that of ranking or mutual relationship of units within a system of arrangement, was added to the first distinctions, and two kinds of classification and two kinds of grouping so distinguished: unranked classes all at the same level produced by paradigmatic classification, and hierarchically ranked classes at several levels produced by taxonomic classification; unranked groups all at the same level produced by statistical clustering, and potentially hierarchically ranked groups at several levels produced by numerical taxonomy. Ranking is deemed relevant because it affects the parsimony of the various devices, hierarchic arrangements being the least parsimonious, but most elegant. 
A comparison of the four possible means of arrangement with the requirements of unit construction for science identifies classificatory devices as appropriate to this general aim and grouping as inappropriate. Classification produces units which have a defined meaning and the possibility of recurrence, whereas grouping produces units which have no specifiable meaning beyond their existence and which are localized at a given point in time and space. Classification provides a means of measuring changes in value and a basis for comparison. Grouping is not reconcilable to measuring change, and cannot provide the framework for comparison. Within classification, the differences between paradigmatic classification and taxonomic classification affect their utility, or rather their roles in scientific endeavor. Paradigmatic classification, by reason of its relative parsimony, can function as the main tool for unit construction when the purpose is heuristic. Taxonomic classification, because of its lack of parsimony, is useful only in didactive situations in which elegant presentation of already established paradigmatic classifications is required. The characteristic lack of parsimony of taxonomies vitiates their use unless the organization can be shown to be appropriate beforehand. 
Another aspect of classification emphasized is the role of problem in its use and evaluation. To construct a classification requires a series of decisions or choices. The field or root of the classification (determined by the discipline), the scale at which features are to be distinguished (determined by the field), and the sets of features to be employed as criteria (determined by the problem) all must be selected and defined. The selection of a feature as definitive represents a hypothesis about the nature of the feature and its relevance for a specific problem. If the hypothesis is assumed to be correct, then the manner in which its use will organize phenomena is predictable. The utility of the hypothesis is tested by comparing the expected distribution with the actual distribution of _denotata_. A given classification either will organize a corpus so that the problem is soluble, or it will not. If alternative classifications are available, the criteria of elegance, parsimony, and sufficiency provide a means of selecting the most appropriate one. Without a specified problem, however, there is no means of justifying the selection of definitive features or evaluating the utility of the classification. Unfortunately, far too often classifications are not accompanied by explicit statements of problem, and this is currently the single greatest operational deficiency in prehistoric systematics. 
Grouping, since it produces extensionally defined units, is not amenable to testing. Because groups are applicable as units only to the material from which they are derived, they cannot be tested against new data. Only the mechanics of grouping are testable, not the groups themselves. Groups are thus usually proclaimed as natural or non-arbitrary in lieu of some specified meaning, and the problem for which they serve is that of "description." It was noted that any set of words will suffice the purpose of "description," and thus the means by which the words are invented is irrelevant. 
To construct a model of prehistory's formal theory utilizing these notions requires that the discipline be defined as a science in such terms as to delineate empirically the subject matter and to specify the general character of its potential explanations. Prehistory is thus the science of artifacts conducted in terms of the concept culture. Artifact, the concept delineating the subject matter of prehistory, is understood to mean anything which owes any of its attributes to human activity, and culture, the concept controlling the nature of its explanations, is defined as shared ideas. Prehistory is the science which isolates human products and seeks to explain them in human terms. The specification of the kind of study (science), the subject matter (artifact), and the kind of explanation (culture) provides the basic elements for the statement of prehistory's formal theory. 
The definitions of both artifact and culture are theoretical and thus do not evidence any particular problem or any particular body of data. They are intended to subsume all of the tactical definitions found in the literature, treating these definitions as special cases of the theoretical definitions and derived by restricting the range of application for a particular problem or body of data. Use of the definitions in the archaeological literature is impossible in the present context because they either evidence some specific content or embody nonessential inferences. 
Once the discipline has been defined and the notions of artifact and culture theoretically defined, the development of a model of prehistory's formal operations is relatively straightforward. The aim of the inquiry can be specified. The role of formal theory must be that of creating cultural classifications for artifacts. Making use of the general considerations in Part I, the goal is limited to showing how prehistory converts classification in general into cultural classifications of artifacts. This entailed the identification of the kinds of classification employed and the manner in which they are used. A necessary adjunct is the identification of grouping devices frequently encountered assuming classificatory functions in "descriptive" and "cultural reconstruction" approaches. 
The identification of the devices used (classification or grouping) and the forms they take (paradigmatic or taxonomic classification and statistical clustering or numerical taxonomy) is not an easy matter, since the means by which they have been created is rarely explicit, the units customarily taken for granted, and, more often than not, unsystematically named. The account provided for the formal operations of prehistory is thus sufficient only to account for what is done. Its parsimony cannot be assessed directly from the literary sources. The examination suggests that only two kinds of classification are employed: paradigmatic classification, which is by far the most common, and a special form of taxonomic classification which makes use of the dimensional features of paradigmatic classification. True taxonomy is not important; the few cases which are conformable to interpretation as true taxonomy are probably poorly explicated examples of the special-case taxonomy. Both statistical clustering and numerical taxonomy are restricted to the "descriptive" approach with the exception of the general use of numerical taxonomy to provide a rationale for the implicit paradigmatic procedures which lead to the construction of phases. Paradigmatic classes are commonly formed for three scales of phenomena: (1) attributes of discrete objects, with the classes termed "modes"; (2) discrete objects, with the classes termed "types"; and (3) occupations (aggregates of discrete objects), with the classes termed "phases." The special-case taxonomies link alternative paradigmatic classifications which differ from each other in level at all three scales. The number of paradigmatic classifications at any scale is infinitely large, not only by varying the level, but also by changing the criteria used-common means of creating classes to serve specific problems (e.g., functional types, historical types at the scale of discrete object; phases, foci, traditions, horizons, stages, and so forth, at the scale of occupation). 
Prehistory has traditionally conceived phenomena in such a manner as to be amenable to scientific explanation. Prehistory further imposes the requirement that the units be cultural. The identities represented by classes and the "behavior" of these classes with respect to other classes and in other dimensions (time/space) must be viewed as the products of ideas held in common by the men who made, used, and deposited the artifacts concerned. How the cultural requirement is met can be treated separately. 
Artifacts are identified by the criterion of human involvement and their identification serves to isolate those phenomena amenable to the interests of prehistory. The ease with which artifacts may be identified varies with scale and circumstance; a certain number of human products may be excluded because of an inability to reasonably assume their artificial origin. This loss of data is a necessary sacrifice to accuracy. It is essential for the purposes of the discipline that no natural objects be included by its systematics, but it is not equally important that all artificial objects are included. The creation of categories of artifacts requires the stipulation of scale and the three scales enumerated above are nearly universal though not exhaustive in prehistory. Implicit in classification at the lowest scale is a fourth and still lower scale, attributes of attributes of discrete objects. Higher scales make use of classes formed at lower scales in analysis. 
Using the concept artifact to segregate phenomena for which cultural classes can be constructed does not mean ipso facto that classes of artifacts are cultural. While this possibility is not generally recognized, non-cultural classes are in practice generally avoided, intuitively. To insure structurally that artifact classes are cultural, additional operations are involved. 
First, the potential features themselves must be identified as products of human activity, a parallel procedure to the identification of artifacts and making use of a dichotomous index (artificial attribute/natural attribute). As with artifact, the identification of artificial attributes varies with circumstance, and a certain number of artificial attributes will be lost, since conditions may not reasonably permit the assumption of human involvement. Restricting the source of criteria to artificial attributes insures that artifacts will be treated as human products, eliminating the possibility of natural classes of artifacts. 
Secondly, prehistory makes an assumption to convert classes defined on the basis of artificial attributes into cultural classes. This single, simple assumption is the pivotal operation in formal theory, the one upon which the discipline is based--:creating features, usually modes, from artificial attributes and completing the articulation of the notion of artifact and that of culture. It is assumed that if a set of objects share the same feature, and that if that feature is artificial, then the objects share that feature because the people responsible shared the same idea. A simple equation is made between recurrent feature and shared idea. As was argued in Part II, this is the only plausible account for shared artificial features. While never explicitly stated in the literature, this is the most universal operation in prehistory, the one which provides such coherence as the discipline has. A certain amount of confusion is possible, and does indeed occur, with regard to this equation: a concern with "intent," contact, and genetic relationships (analogs/ homologs). These post hoc queries are irrelevant so far as formal theory is concerned. The equation stipulates only formal sharing, that the artifacts concerned may be treated (for a specified purpose) as products of the same mental template. The equation does not say how or why the sharing takes place. This latter concern is entirely inferential; it is an explanation of the distribution of class _denotata_, and it plays no role in their definition. 
The testability of classifications is a requirement of science, but a requirement neglected by prehistory even though many of its classifications are testable. The terminological confusion, the vagueness of labeling, and the lack of explicit problems combine to deprive prehistoric classification of much of its potential. Perhaps it is too much to ask for testing and explicit statement of problem when all the preceding operations are implicit, haphazard, and ad hoc constructions in common practice. Nonetheless, when the operations are explicit the investigator is forced to make explicit statements of problem and thus creates potentially testable classifications. To construct classes, specific dimensions of features, again usually modes, must be selected as criteria, other dimensions being discarded from a definitive role in the context of a given classification. This decision, or set of decisions, must be justified on the basis of the relevance of the set of dimensions chosen to the problem for which the classes are being constructed. The justification should always have the form of an hypothesis about the nature and relevance of the dimension of modes to the problem. The testing of these devices follows the basic pattern for hypothesis evaluation: the decision, once made, either will create classes which have the necessary distribution characteristics or it will not. An affirmative result (e.g., a particular set of classes will function in seriation) shows that the classes are sufficient. Comparison with alternative classifications makes it possible to ascertain if the classification is the best available. 
An important consequence, not as widely recognized and practiced as could be hoped for, is that there are-indeed there must be-as many classifications as there are problems and methods for their solution. Different classifications are created by changing levels (e.g., "ware-type-variety") and by changing criteria (e.g., functional types, ethnological types, historical types). Monolithic "right" classifications have no place in prehistory or any other science which lacks a singularity of inquiry. A single rock will have many names, a single occupation belong to many phases. Our common sense desire for a perfect class/object equation has no utility for phenomena beyond common experience and common interest. Figure 23 presents in summary fashion the basic elements of formal theory as employed in prehistory. The diagram illustrates only the most usual program, that is, one which begins with modes as the analytic step for the classification of discrete objects. The figure represents the path taken to convert classification into cultural classification of artifacts. The end product classes, (mode, type, and phase) denote the scale of phenomena for which they are constructed, their paradigmatic nature, and the cultural quality of their defining criteria. These are the only characteristics which can be included for the discipline as a whole in a problem-free context. The number of defining criteria and the particular criteria chosen are a function of the requirements of particular kinds of problems, and variations in these aspects produce the large number of modes, types, and phases, sometimes recognized under special labels such as tradition, horizon, ware, or functional type, and some.
times terminologically undifferentiated. However, prehistory's formal theory, in spite of the presentation afforded it in the literature, is rather simple-there being but three kinds of units employed and their formulation as cultural units of scientific utility being founded upon a small set of simple discriminations and a single, important, but simple assumption. 
This view is, of course, not the only one possible. Given the terminological difficulties of prehistory's literature, many accounts are undoubtedly possible. The account presented does offer the advantages of consistency coupled with utility for the purpose of explanation. Also, this is an account of what has been done, not what might be done or could be done. Simply examining Figure 23 suggests that redundancy is involved in the repetition of the artificial/natural discrimination for both artifacts and attributes. This, however, appears to be the way It is done. The prehistorian recovers artifacts and then dis.criminates their attributes rather than recovering artificial attributes and then noting the objects in which they occur. 

Figure 23. Elemental formal operations in prehistory. 
## Larger Issues 
Lest the approach taken be misunderstood, it should be clear that the qualitative program adhered to throughout is not a rejection of statistical-oriented approaches. It rather tries to show why grouping and counts are inappropriate to unit construction. The particular view espoused here is perfectly consistent with the goals and most of the methods of the new archaeology, save those attempts to employ groups in the stead of classes. This latter procedure I have tried to show is both counter-productive and deceptive-counter-productive because, it does not convey meaning precisely and is not capable of expansion; deceptive because, while it cannot predict, it does provide lucid and elegant accounts of what one already knows. 
Statistical techniques have their appropriate role in the manipulation of data, not in its creation. These techniques are necessary to construct distributions and compare and correlate data in their variable aspects, and they will be all the more powerful if they constitute tests of hypotheses embedded in the systematics rather than a shuffling of data. This is possible only when units are properly and explicitly formulated, and it is in this that the "old archaeology" can make an important contribution to the new. 
The abuse and inconsistency in the use of classification and its consequent failure in many circumstances certainly points to the need for improvement; however, improvement is not forthcoming from grouping devices. Bad practice has been confused with bad theory and method. The method-classification-is sound, indeed the only device possible, but its practice in prehistory has thwarted its potential. Certainly there are further ramifications. To a formalist, much of the concern with elaborate statistical devices appears as an attempt to correct with a calculus arithmetic errors which have been obscured by multitudinous manipulations. Many of the problems for which factor analysis is proposed, for example, would simply not exist if the formal units had been precisely constructed in the first place with a full knowledge of the wide range of units that can be and in fact have been employed. There may well be a role for factor analysis but it does not appear to be the imperfect correction of errors in systematics; if it has a role to play, this can be reasonably determined only after a reasonable systematic is in use. The qualitative and quantitative are not alternatives; they are necessary complements. The manipulation of the phenomenological world must always be, overtly or covertly, statistical in at least some minimal sense. What correlations mean, not their utility, is questioned. Statistical manipulation is not a means of discovery (this always has been and always will be "guessing"), but a means of testing the efficacy of qualitatively derived units. Regarding the units as givens rather than hypotheses is the principal sin of the old archaeology; currently, disregarding the role of qualitative operations is the sin of the new. 
The old archaeology and the new archaeology are not competing approaches, for each has a distinctive and dependent relationship with the other. The old archaeology, basically qualitative, provides the units which the new archaeology can use for explanation. Both are necessary components of a science. The terminological and conceptual ambiguity of the old archaeology resulting in both misapplication of classification and lack of explanation is a function of the state of development of the discipline. There is no model for a science of man, though there are models for parts of it such as have been used here. Errors have been made, perhaps the principal one being the use of sociocultural anthropology as a model. The new archaeology has corrected some of these errors. It has provided the stimulation to correct others. It has incorporated others. The clarification of the old archaeology is a requirement for the success of the new. 
